---
layout:     post
title:      From stars to data
date:       2013-08-26
summary:    It’s done and dusted. I have just made the decision to leave astronomy and embark on a journey to become a data scientist. It was something that has been brewing in my mind for a while. The opportunity to make the switch came up a few weeks ago and I took it.
---

It's done and dusted. I have just made the decision to leave astronomy and embark on a journey to become a data scientist. It was something that has been brewing in my mind for a while. The opportunity to make the switch came up a few weeks ago and I took it.

I'll admit it wasn't an easy decision. I really enjoy working as an astronomer and invested so much of my blood and sweat in the field. It's hard to say good bye to the warm atmosphere in the science community, colleagues, friends, and the fun collaborations. A lot to leave behind. But, my interest in data science and the tech industry has been growing. Talking about the tech industry with those who are already in it gave me a good idea what the expectations are and what I would be doing. After many discussions with close friends and family, I decided to commit myself to data science.

During my astronomy career I wrote a Python book on [SciPy and NumPy](http://shop.oreilly.com/product/0636920020219.do), tools that people can use to for data analysis. As a consultant for the up and coming startup company, [Authorea](https://www.authorea.com/), I have helped out with building a platform to write academic articles in your browser for open science and the implementation of cool technologies like D3.js.

For the last half year I have lead a project with an amazing team called Raspberry Sky, that will become public in a few months. Raspberry Sky creates an extensive amount of data from around the world that data scientists and astronomers would love to get their hands on.

Reflecting on where I was heading with my career, I realized that data science is for me. But, I'm not quite there yet. I'm about to begin an intensive six week schedule at the [Insight Data Science Fellows Program](http://insightdatascience.com/). It will be an exciting and intense period, where I will learn what makes science data tick. I'm not sure where I will end up in Silicon Valley yet, but wherever it will be it's gonna be a lot of fun.
