---
layout:     post
title:      Python for data analysis on OSX
date:       2013-02-05
summary:    Arranging a good Python setup on OSX for data analysis can be tough due to packages like NumPy, SciPy, and Matplotlib. After trial and error from personal experiences and teaching at workshops, I have found an easy setup that just works
---

Arranging a good Python setup on OSX for data analysis can be tough due to packages like NumPy, SciPy, and Matplotlib. After trial and error from personal experiences and teaching at workshops, I have found an easy setup that just works. This may not be the best setup for everyone, but for data analysts this is it.

For reference, this article was inspired by [Jake Vanderplas's blog](http://jakevdp.github.com/blog/2013/02/02/setting-up-a-mac-for-python-development/) where he talked about setting up a Mac for Python development. The article is a great read with a healthy discussion in the comment section.

##Breakdown##
The Python setup is broken into three components.

1. Macports
2. Virtualenv
3. Pip

Macports will be used to install the complex binary Python packages (especially SciPy). Then we'll use virtualenv to create a friendly environment for installing other Python packages through pip.

###Macports###
On OSX you can easily install NumPy, SciPy, and Matplotlib through Macports. First install Macports by following these [instructions](http://www.macports.org/install.php). You will need [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/) and `command line tools` installed for Macports since there will a fair amount of code compiling. Once you have Macports installed you should do the following.

    sudo port selfupdate
    sudo port install py27-numpy py27-scipy py27-matplotlib
              py27-virtualenv

This will take roughly an hour, so grab some coffee. I'm including virtualenv in the `port` install to make sure that the virtualenv setup does not confused in the later steps.

###Virtualenv and pip###
After Macports has done its job you should use `virtualenv` to setup a friendly environment for installing additional packages.

    virtualenv-2.7 local --system-site-packages

The `--system-site-packages` option makes the `local` environment aware of the NumPy, SciPy, and Matplotlib packages that have been installed with `Macports`. For the next step you will want to activate the `virtualenv` environment. You can do this temporarily or permanently for whenever you launch your favorite terminal application. For the temporary activation should execute `source ~/local/bin/activate` in your terminal.

If you want the virtualenv environment present whenever you open a new terminal then place the `source` command in you .bashrc, .bash_profile, or .profile file. Assuming that you named the virtualenv folder "local", you should see `(local)` in your new terminal windows. To install a Python package through pip you simply do the following.

    pip install somepackagename

You're all set from here. You should be able to install most packages without issues. If you download a package and you want to install it locally you can do

    pip install somepackagename/

and pip will recognize from the slash character that you mean a local install. This is particularly useful when you're downloading packages from Github. If you run into a package that is tough to install due to dependencies it may be a good idea to see if it is available in Macports.

There is another fantastic package manager called [Homebrew](http://mxcl.github.com/homebrew/). It's not mentioned here as I don't use it, but if you're curious go take a look. Just bear in mind that getting packages like SciPy can be trickier with Homebrew. If you're interested in this route - take a look at [Matt Davis's blog](http://penandpants.com/2012/02/24/install-python/).
