---
layout:     post
title:      D3.js and Coffeescript for scientists
date:       2013-03-08
summary:    In the summer of 2012 I was at the the fourth .Astronomy meeting in Heidelberg, Germany. It's a meeting where some of the most exciting and cutting-edge ideas about astronomy and the web are discussed. It's a bit like TED, but more informal where think tanking is done through unconference sessions. In between the crazy schedule, I had time to chat with Alberto Pepe, a post-doc working at Harvard. He had something to show me.
---

Last week I talked about [Coffeescript for scientists](http://astrobiased.com/Coffeescript-for-scientists.html). Now we're gonna get our hands dirty with D3.js to start our path on making visually stunning plots for the web. To follow this post you should have a setup similar to the one described in the *Writing and debugging* section of the previous post on [Coffescript](http://coffeescript.org/).

###What D3.js is and is not###
Before moving on, we should have a clear understanding of what D3.js *is* and *is not*. On the D3.js [homepage](http://d3js.org/), the main motto is "Data Driven Documents". Think of an HTML page as a blank document and we can do anything we want with it, provided that we have the right tools. D3.js is the tool that allows us to bind arbitrary data to the document and apply data-driven operations, such as creating tables to rich, dynamic, and interactive visualizations. Hence, it's not just a plotting package, but much more.

###The beginning###
Scientists are used to making static plots for journal publications, so we'll begin with static outputs. In the next tutorial we'll move into dynamic features. Continuing from the previous Coffeescript post, we revisit the polygon code with a small modification that includes a `radius` parameter (for circle objects). You can follow these examples with the code I have created for this post [here](https://github.com/ebressert/coffee4scientists). This includes the HTML, Coffeescript, and javascscipt output to make the visuals shown below.

{% highlight coffeescript linenos %}
# Defining a function
polygon = (sides, size, radius, center) ->
    # Setting up angles to get polygon vertices
    circle = 2 * Math.PI
    angle = circle / sides
    points = []

    # With the polygon defined we iterate through
    # the sides to get the nth polygon we want.
    for i in [0..sides]
        x = (Math.cos(angle * i) * size) + center[0]
        y = (Math.sin(angle * i) * size) + center[1]
        points[i] = {"x": x, "y": y, "r": radius}

    return points
{% endhighlight %}

To initiate the environment for D3.js we now include the following code with the polygon function.

{% highlight coffeescript linenos %}
# Creating data from our function, which is a sexagon
# centered at (250, 250).
polyData = polygon(6, 150, 20, [250, 250])

# Creating the d3.js object that will be called in a div class
# called "experimental".
svg = d3.select("#experimental")
    .append("svg")
    .attr("width", 500)
    .attr("height", 500)

# Here we setup the object for circles along with the style
# Tip, think CSS.
circles = svg.selectAll("circle")
    .data(polyData)
    .enter()
    .append("circle")
    .style("fill", "gray")
    .style("stroke", "none")
    .style("stroke-width", 2)

# We passed polyData to '.data' above. In the 'circles' object
# data is stored as 'd'. Below we create functions that
# iteratively return the polyData values.
circleAttributes = circles
    .attr("cx",  (d) -> (d.x))
    .attr("cy",  (d) -> (d.y))
    .attr("r",  (d) -> (d.r))
{% endhighlight %}

Here's the output in D3.js form.

<div id="experimental-circles-only"></div>

This illustrates in terms of simple circles where the vertices of the polygon are located. What if we want to see the actual polygon itself? We can select the `polygon` option and then use the same `polyData` object.

{% highlight coffeescript linenos %}
# Similar to the circles object.
polygons = svg.selectAll("polygon")
.data([polyData])
.enter()
.append('polygon')
.style("stroke", "gray")
.style("stroke-width", 2)  
.style("fill", 'none')

# This is setup such that we can add multiple polygons.
polygonAttributes = polygons
    .attr("points",(d) -> (d.map((d) -> ([d.x, d.y]).join(",")).join(" ")))
{% endhighlight %}

Here we combine the circles with the polygon object, which are layered over one another.

<div id="experimental-circles-polygon"></div>

With some of the basics we can play around with the polygon function to create some strange looking polygons. Here's an example.

<div id="experimental-poly-gone-crazy"></div>

So far we have learned some basic operations on how to make static objects with D3.js and Coffeescript. If you look at js code that's created from Coffeescript, you will see that Coffeescript is much more readable and easier to program in. This helps the scientist/researcher get work done in a short amount of time. Next week we'll start looking into creating dynamic plots. Believe it or not, much of the code we went over here doesn't have to changed much for dynamic operations.

<script src="http://d3js.org/d3.v3.min.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">
// Generated by CoffeeScript 1.4.0
(function() {
  var circleAttributes, circles, polyCrazy, polyData, polyGoneCrazy, polygon, polygonAttributes, polygons, svg1, svg2, svg3;

  polygon = function(sides, size, radius, center) {
    var angle, circle, i, points, x, y, _i;
    circle = 2 * Math.PI;
    angle = circle / sides;
    points = [];
    for (i = _i = 0; 0 <= sides ? _i <= sides : _i >= sides; i = 0 <= sides ? ++_i : --_i) {
      x = (Math.cos(angle * i) * size) + center[0];
      y = (Math.sin(angle * i) * size) + center[1];
      points[i] = {
        "x": x,
        "y": y,
        "r": radius
      };
    }
    return points;
  };

  polyGoneCrazy = function(sides, size, radius, center) {
    var angle, circle, i, points, random, x, y, _i;
    circle = 2 * Math.PI;
    angle = circle / sides;
    points = [];
    for (i = _i = 0; 0 <= sides ? _i <= sides : _i >= sides; i = 0 <= sides ? ++_i : --_i) {
      random = Math.floor(Math.random() * (size + 100));
      x = (Math.cos(angle * i) * random) + center[0];
      y = (Math.sin(angle * i) * random) + center[1];
      points[i] = {
        "x": x,
        "y": y,
        "r": radius
      };
    }
    return points;
  };

  polyData = polygon(6, 150, 20, [250, 250]);

  polyCrazy = polyGoneCrazy(100, 150, 20, [250, 250]);

  svg1 = d3.select("#experimental-circles-only").append("svg").attr("width", 500).attr("height", 500);

  circles = svg1.selectAll("circle").data(polyData).enter().append("circle").style("fill", "gray").style("stroke", "none").style("stroke-width", 2);

  circleAttributes = circles.attr("cx", function(d) {
    return d.x;
  }).attr("cy", function(d) {
    return d.y;
  }).attr("r", function(d) {
    return d.r;
  });

  svg2 = d3.select("#experimental-circles-polygon").append("svg").attr("width", 500).attr("height", 500);

  circles = svg2.selectAll("circle").data(polyData).enter().append("circle").style("fill", "gray").style("stroke", "none").style("stroke-width", 1);

  circleAttributes = circles.attr("cx", function(d) {
    return d.x;
  }).attr("cy", function(d) {
    return d.y;
  }).attr("r", function(d) {
    return d.r;
  });

  polygons = svg2.selectAll("polygon").data([polyData]).enter().append('polygon').style("stroke", "gray").style("stroke-width", 10).style("fill", 'none');

  polygonAttributes = polygons.attr("points", function(d) {
    return d.map(function(d) {
      return [d.x, d.y].join(",");
    }).join(" ");
  });

  svg3 = d3.select("#experimental-poly-gone-crazy").append("svg").attr("width", 500).attr("height", 500);

  polygons = svg3.selectAll("polygon").data([polyCrazy]).enter().append('polygon').style("stroke", "gray").style("stroke-width", 1).style("fill", 'gray');

  polygonAttributes = polygons.attr("points", function(d) {
    return d.map(function(d) {
      return [d.x, d.y].join(",");
    }).join(" ");
  });

}).call(this);

</script>
